DOC: Design document for the `dataset` argument (#5868)
datalad/datalad: docs/source/design/dataset_argument.rst

.. -*- mode: rst -*-
.. vi: set ft=rst sts=4 ts=4 sw=4 et tw=79:

.. _chap_design_dataset_argument:

********************
``dataset`` argument
********************

All commands which operate on datasets have a ``dataset`` argument (``-d`` or
``--dataset`` for the command line API) to identify a single dataset as the

> context of an operation.

Reviewer: I think this section lacks a hint on what is considered the context, if no `--dataset` argument is given. And that probably is the part that makes it somewhat confusing. Context ds is either `-d`, derived from PWD or derived from a given `path` argument.

Author: I agree that this would be nice. But ultimately this section does not have such hint, because I am not aware of a general valid approach. The best I could come up with is "given no `dataset` declares no context, and all bets are off" i.e. the command will do whatever seems to make sense. But this is not a "design" and unknown whether actually true. Even your statement is speculation AFAICS. Let's start simple.

Reviewer 2: Reminded me about https://github.com/datalad/datalad/issues/3905 (refers to relevant issues there as well) which unfortunately didn't get any traction, but I see this PR as a step toward addressing it.

I echo @bpoldrack 's comment that  "here" might be the correct place to state what the "context of an operation" really means, and how does it "differ" whenever `--dataset` is not specified.  E.g. `save` would add/save present but not yet "known" subdataset even without `-d` but `clone` would not unless `-d` is given.

<details>
<summary>example</summary> 

```shell
# sorry -- I start "dirty"
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> datalad status      
 modified: hcp-100206-git-annex2 (dataset)

$> datalad clone ///
install(ok): /tmp/testds/datasets.datalad.org (dataset)                                                                                                                                                              

$> datalad status   
untracked: datasets.datalad.org (directory)
 modified: hcp-100206-git-annex2 (dataset)

$> datalad clone -d. /// another.datasets.datalad.org
install(ok): another.datasets.datalad.org (dataset)                                                                                                                                                                  
add(ok): another.datasets.datalad.org (file)                                                                                                                                                                         
add(ok): .gitmodules (file)                                                                                                                                                                                          
save(ok): . (dataset)                                                                                                                                                                                                
action summary:                                                                                                                                                                                                      
  add (ok: 2)
  install (ok: 1)
  save (ok: 1)
datalad clone -d. /// another.datasets.datalad.org  4.02s user 1.93s system 38% cpu 15.410 total

$> datalad status                                    
untracked: datasets.datalad.org (directory)
 modified: hcp-100206-git-annex2 (dataset)

$> datalad --version
datalad 0.14.6
```
</details>
and I feel that some other operations also might still have this duality in their operation depending on either `--dataset` is provided or not, while often still operating on a dataset deduced to be the "context" of operation. E.g. above with `clone` the "context" is the cloned dataset, not dataset we are currently in.

So may be smth like

```suggestion
If ``--dataset`` argument is not provided, context of an operation is operation-specific (e.g., for `clone` command -- the dataset which is being cloned), but typically - a dataset which current working directory belongs to.
In the latter case, if operation (e.g., `get`) does not find a dataset in current working directory, operation fails with an ``NoDatasetFound`` error.
```

If we see it needing to be formalized more later, we could get a dedicated section on that, but IMHO we should not just completely disregard situation whenever `--dataset` is **not** provided here.

Impact on relative path resolution
==================================

With one exception, the nature of a provided ``dataset`` argument does **not**
impact the interpretation of relative paths. Relative paths are always considered
to be relative to the process working directory.

The one exception to this rule is passing a ``Dataset`` object instance as
``dataset`` argument value in the Python API. In this, and only this, case, a
relative path is interpreted as relative to the root of the respective dataset.

Special values
==============

There are some pre-defined "shortcut" values for dataset arguments:

``^``
   Represents to the topmost superdataset that contains the dataset the current
   directory is part of.
``^.``
   Represents the root directory of the dataset the current directory is part of.
``///``
   Represents the "default" dataset located under `$HOME/datalad/`.

Use cases
=========

Save modification in superdataset hierarchy
-------------------------------------------

Sometimes it is convenient to work only in the context of a subdataset.
Executing a ``datalad save <subdataset content>`` will record changes to the

> subdataset, but will leave existing superdatasets dirty, as the subdataset

Reviewer: While I generally agree (and see the technical reason, of course), I wonder whether this approach really is, what we should do. "Sometimes it is convenient to work only in the context of a subdataset." True. And: Given the aim for a "mono-repo experience", it makes sense to *only sometimes* "work only in the context of a subdataset". However, since the context by default is derived from a path argument (as shown here in `datalad save <subdataset content>`) and pretty much all commands do operate on paths, the mono-repo view is *not* the default. Quite the opposite: In order to know what a "simple" (as in "no options specified") invocation like this will do, I need to be aware of the subdataset boundaries. Not sure about a solution, but for now I wonder whether we agree there's an issue. May be it's just me ...

Author: I am not sure what you are asking for? Remove the example? Change how `save` works?

Reviewer: As far as documenting the status quo goes the only asking is my comment further up - pointing out how PWD and a possible `path` argument contribute to determining the context.

Other than that: Wondering whether we are satisfied with how `-d` works (it's not about `save`). The suggestion would be to take `path` out of the equation and make the context always `-d` with default `.`. This would be a breaking change - yes (But easy in implementation, I think). ATM I think it would be much more intuitive, though.

.. -*- mode: rst -*-
.. vi: set ft=rst sts=4 ts=4 sw=4 et tw=79:

.. _chap_design_dataset_argument:

********************
``dataset`` argument
********************

.. topic:: Specification scope and status

   This specification describes the current implementation.

All commands which operate on datasets have a ``dataset`` argument (``-d`` or

> ``--dataset`` for the command line API) to identify a single dataset as the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``--dataset`` for the :term:`CLI`) to identify a single dataset as the
```
and add CLI to glossary? After all Command Line Interface is not necessarily used as an API but rather as an "interactive" interface.

context of an operation.

Impact on relative path resolution
==================================

With one exception, the nature of a provided ``dataset`` argument does **not**
impact the interpretation of relative paths. Relative paths are always considered
to be relative to the process working directory.

The one exception to this rule is passing a ``Dataset`` object instance as
``dataset`` argument value in the Python API. In this, and only this, case, a

> relative path is interpreted as relative to the root of the respective dataset.

Reviewer 2: note: I always thought about it "in reverse", that CLI was a special case, not Python interface, but then realized that unbound invocations (i.e., like `datalad.api.clone`, without `dataset` being provided) also present in Python API.  So this formulation is probably the most succinct indeed to reflect the current state of the affairs.  But with "explicit better than implicit" (and the fact that `Dataset().<operation>` is passing `dataset` argument to operation is IMHO implicit here) I wonder if we better lay it out explicitly in addition (or instead) here:

```suggestion
relative path is interpreted as relative to the root of the respective dataset.

More specifically:

- relative paths in CLI are treated relative to :term:`CWD`
- relative paths in Python API will be treated 
  - to :term:`CWD` in invocations like ``datalad.api.<operation>(<arguments>)`` if ``<arguments>`` does not include ``dataset``
  - to context dataset root if 
    - aforementioned ``<operation>``invocation includes ``dataset`` argument
    - ``<operation>`` is performed as a `Dataset` object instance bound method, i.e. as ``Dataset(...).<operation>(<arguments>)``. **Note:** specification of ``dataset`` among ``<arguments>`` in such invocation will result in error.
```

Author: TBH I don't like that. I is probably saying the same thing, but even on third pass I am not confident that it is, or whether it add additional nuances.

Reviewer 2: ok, let's not bother being explicit

Special values
==============

There are some pre-defined "shortcut" values for dataset arguments:

``^``
   Represents to the topmost superdataset that contains the dataset the current
   directory is part of.
``^.``
   Represents the root directory of the dataset the current directory is part of.
``///``
   Represents the "default" dataset located under `$HOME/datalad/`.

Use cases
=========

Save modification in superdataset hierarchy
-------------------------------------------

Sometimes it is convenient to work only in the context of a subdataset.
Executing a ``datalad save <subdataset content>`` will record changes to the
subdataset, but will leave existing superdatasets dirty, as the subdataset

> state change will not be saved there. Using the ``dataset`` argument it is

Reviewer 2: echoing resolved discussion with @bpoldrack - I think the "context of operation" is still to vague, and there it seems to suggest something like 

```rst
Some (or all?) operations can "transfer" the context of operation to the subdatasets provided in the path, if no `--dataset` argument is provided.
```
which would possibly provide explanation on how come `save <subdataset content>` does not operate in the context of current dataset (which it might if one of the paths is within this dataset) but "in the context of a subdataset".

Actual reality is actually even a bit more tricky, since 

<details>
<summary>we do also operate in the context of CWD dataset - since we do `save` the change saved within subdataset </summary> 

```shell
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git
$> datalad status
untracked: datasets.datalad.org (directory)
 modified: hcp-100206-git-annex2 (dataset)
(dev3) 1 26057.....................................:Thu 05 Aug 2021 10:43:32 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git
$> touch sub1/newfile newfilehere1 newfilehere2
(dev3) 1 26058.....................................:Thu 05 Aug 2021 10:43:53 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git
$> datalad status
untracked: datasets.datalad.org (directory)
untracked: newfilehere1 (file)
untracked: newfilehere2 (file)
 modified: hcp-100206-git-annex2 (dataset)
 modified: sub1 (dataset)
(dev3) 1 26059.....................................:Thu 05 Aug 2021 10:43:59 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git
$> datalad save sub1/newfile newfilehere1
add(ok): newfile (file)                                                                                                                                                                                              
save(ok): sub1 (dataset)                                                                                                                                                                                             
add(ok): sub1 (file)                                                                                                                                                                                                 
add(ok): newfilehere1 (file)                                                                                                                                                                                         
save(ok): . (dataset)                                                                                                                                                                                                
action summary:                                                                                                                                                                                                      
  add (ok: 3)
  save (ok: 2)
(dev3) 1 26060.....................................:Thu 05 Aug 2021 10:44:11 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git
$> datalad status
untracked: datasets.datalad.org (directory)
untracked: newfilehere2 (file)
 modified: hcp-100206-git-annex2 (dataset)

(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git
$> touch sub1/newfile2                          
(dev3) 1 26062.....................................:Thu 05 Aug 2021 10:45:06 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git
$> datalad save sub1/newfile2
add(ok): newfile2 (file)                                                                                                                                                                                             
save(ok): sub1 (dataset)                                                                                                                                                                                             
action summary:                                                                                                                                                                                                      
  add (ok: 1)
  save (ok: 1)

$> datalad --version
datalad 0.14.7+1.g721315d5d.dirty

```
</details>

so may be this statement is not correct altogether?

Reviewer 2: I think I just got mislead by `save(ok): sub1 (dataset)` assuming that it was to inform that we saved updated state of `sub1` within current dataset

<details>
<summary>but it is not the case</summary> 

```shell
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> git status       
On branch master
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git restore <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)
	modified:   sub1 (new commits)

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
(dev3) 1 26407 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:25:21 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> datalad save sub1/
(dev3) 1 26408 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:25:42 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> touch sub1/newfile3
(dev3) 1 26409 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:25:48 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> datalad save sub1  
add(ok): newfile3 (file)                                                                                  
save(ok): sub1 (dataset)                                                                                  
action summary:                                                                                           
  add (ok: 1)
  save (ok: 1)
(dev3) 1 26410 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:25:55 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> git status         
On branch master
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git restore <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)
	modified:   sub1 (new commits)

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")
(dev3) 1 26411 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:26:21 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> git show | head
commit d7e5959365f6bc575a89e1a49d8dc1d504680c6f
Author: Yaroslav Halchenko <debian@onerussian.com>
Date:   Thu Aug 5 10:44:11 2021 -0400

    [DATALAD] Recorded changes

diff --git a/newfilehere1 b/newfilehere1
new file mode 120000
index 0000000..ce38032
--- /dev/null
(dev3) 1 26412 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:26:41 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> touch sub1/newfile4                                             
(dev3) 1 26413 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:28:09 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> datalad save sub1/      
add(ok): newfile4 (file)                                                                                  
save(ok): sub1 (dataset)                                                                                  
action summary:                                                                                           
  add (ok: 1)
  save (ok: 1)
(dev3) 1 26414 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:28:28 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> touch sub1/newfile5
(dev3) 1 26415 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:28:31 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> datalad save sub1/newfile5
add(ok): newfile5 (file)                                                                                  
save(ok): sub1 (dataset)                                                                                  
action summary:                                                                                           
  add (ok: 1)
  save (ok: 1)
(dev3) 1 26416 [1].....................................:Fri 06 Aug 2021 09:28:38 AM EDT:.
(git-annex)lena:/tmp/testds[master]git-annex
$> git status
On branch master
Changes not staged for commit:
  (use "git add <file>..." to update what will be committed)
  (use "git restore <file>..." to discard changes in working directory)
	modified:   sub1 (new commits)

no changes added to commit (use "git add" and/or "git commit -a")

```
</details>

so the statement was correct.

Reviewer 2: I will mark it as resolved and will not bother about clarifying "context" here

.. -*- mode: rst -*-
.. vi: set ft=rst sts=4 ts=4 sw=4 et tw=79:

.. _chap_design_dataset_argument:

********************
``dataset`` argument
********************

.. topic:: Specification scope and status

   This specification describes the current implementation.

All commands which operate on datasets have a ``dataset`` argument (``-d`` or
``--dataset`` for the :term:`CLI`) to identify a single dataset as the

> If ``--dataset`` argument is not provided, the context of an operation is operation-specific (e.g., for `clone` command -- the dataset which is being cloned), but typically - a dataset which current working directory belongs to.

Reviewer 2: and crap -- I have missed that my suggestion killed the ending of prior sentence, sorry @mih.
In either case, at least this one better be split into multiple sentences, e.g.
```suggestion
context of an operation.
If ``--dataset`` argument is not provided, the context of an operation is operation-specific.
For example, `clone` command will consider the :term:`dataset` which is being cloned to be the context.
But typically, a dataset which current working directory belongs to is the context of an operation.
```

Author: I have adjusted your suggestion: `s/operation-specific/command-specific/` will commit now.

> In the latter case, if operation (e.g., `get`) does not find a dataset in current working directory, operation fails with an ``NoDatasetFound`` error.

Reviewer 2: if we decide to not "migrate" toward a sentence per line in written text, I will wrap them.
WDYT @mih @bpoldrack ?
